---
layout: post
title: Popularity of Songs on Spotify
subtitle: by Andrew Lee
gh-repo: daattali/beautiful-jekyll
gh-badge: [star, fork, follow]
tags: [test]
comments: true
---

This is a demo post to show you how to write blog posts with markdown.  I strongly encourage you to [take 5 minutes to learn how to write in markdown](https://markdowntutorial.com/) - it'll teach you how to transform regular text into bold/italics/headings/tables/etc.

**Here is some bold text**

## Here is a secondary heading


##Introduction##
Spotify is one of the largest music streaming platforms in the world, boasting 155 million premium subscribers and 345 million monthly active users. With that comes a treasure trove of data on users’ preferences when it comes to music. I wanted to dive deeper into some of this data to find insights on what makes certain songs more popular than others. 

##Description of the Data##
The Spotify dataset was found on Kaggle, and contains audio features on ~175,000 songs from 1921-2021. For this analysis, I restricted the dataset to songs that were released from 2010-2020.

The features are:

**Primary:**
id (Id of track generated by Spotify)
Continuous:
acousticness (Ranges from 0 to 1)
danceability (Ranges from 0 to 1)
energy (Ranges from 0 to 1)
duration_ms (Integer typically ranging from 200k to 300k)
instrumentalness (Ranges from 0 to 1)
valence (Ranges from 0 to 1)
popularity (Ranges from 0 to 100)
tempo (Float typically ranging from 50 to 150)
liveness (Ranges from 0 to 1)
loudness (Float typically ranging from -60 to 0)
speechiness (Ranges from 0 to 1)
year (Ranges from 1921 to 2020)
**Dummy:**
mode (0 = Minor, 1 = Major)
explicit (0 = No explicit content, 1 = Explicit content)
**Categorial:**
key (All keys on octave encoded as values ranging from 0 to 11, starting on C as 0, C# as 1 and so on…)
artists (List of artists mentioned)
release_date (Date of release mostly in yyyy-mm-dd format, however precision of date may vary)
name (Name of the song)

##Statistical Methods##
Before I proposed a hypothesis, I wanted to see which feature of this dataset had the highest correlation to ‘popularity’, which measures the popularity of the song from a scale of 0-100. Although the feature ‘explicit’ had the highest correlation to ‘popularity’, I decided to ignore it in my analysis because I found this variable to be arbitrary. After careful examination, I found that ‘instrumentalness’ had the highest correlation to song ‘popularity’ with a correlation of -0.3105. Instrumentalness is a measure from 0 to 1, where a value closer to 1 indicates a greater likelihood the track contains no vocal content. 

**I proposed the following hypothesis:**

Null Hypothesis: Songs with low ‘instrumentalness’ values and songs with high ‘instrumentalness’ values have THE SAME mean ‘popularity’ scores.

Alternative Hypothesis: Songs with low ‘instrumentalness’ values and songs with high ‘instrumentalness’ values have DIFFERENT mean ‘popularity’ scores.

Significance Level: 95%

When preparing the data for analysis, I created a new feature ‘instrumental_level’ that provided a value of 0 if a song’s ‘instrumentalness’ value was less than or equal to 0.5, and 1 otherwise. Doing this proved helpful for the statistical test. I separated the dataset based on their ‘instrumental_level’ (either 0 or 1) and compared the ‘popularity’ values of these two dataframes in a two-sample t-test in order to test for a significant relationship. 

##Two-sample t-test##


##Results##
The resulting t-statistic is 0.0 and p-value is 68.88. Based on these results, we can conclude that we reject the null hypothesis that songs with low ‘instrumentalness’ values and songs with high ‘instrumentalness’ values have the same mean ‘popularity’ scores on Spotify. Instrumental_level does have a significant effect on ‘popularity’ of songs on Spotify.







##Conclusion##
In conclusion, there is a significant relationship between ‘instrumentalness’ and ‘popularity’ of songs on Spotify. When comparing the mean ‘popularity’ scores of songs with high instrumentalness to songs with low instrumentalness, we find that the resulting p-value is 0.0. This indicates that at the 95% significance level, we reject our original null hypothesis. 

Further research should include examining the graphs, as both songs with low instrumentalness and songs with high instrumentalness have a similar distribution in ‘popularity’ of songs.
